Day 1:
1. Observe repiration (natural incoming and outgoing breath). Don't control/regulate your breathing.
2. Observe the reality as it is and not the way you like it to be.
3. Don't verbalize or visualize the breaths. Sectarian remedy won't help.
4. Know thyself at the actual/experiential level.
5. I = Combination of physical + mental structure
6. Some organs work as our wishes. Example: move the legs, open/close the eye lids, etc. Some internal organs don't work as our wishes. Example: stop beating the heart. But breathing can work in both the cases.
7. Focus only on the nose area (nostril window, nostril passage and the moustache region). After two days, the concentration/focus area will become smaller (nostril window and moustache region) to make your mind sharper. Feel the touch of the incoming and outgoing breath. Smily accept the fact that the mind has wandered away and bring it back to concentrate on breathing.
8. Mind can wander in the past or future. Hence, it is always agitated. Please live in the present = art of living.
9. There are two patterns of thoughts when the mind wanders away: pleasant and unpleasant. Craving/Clinging = pleasant memories = Raga. Aversion/Hatred = unpleasant memories = Dvesha. In both the cases, the mind becomes unbalanced. Your respiration should not create Raga or Dvesha, be equanimous.
10. Moha = Ignorance about your mental being. Mind creates a sequence of random thoughts and we are ignoring this.
11. Rules:
	a. Don't leave the course in between
	b. Meditate with a straight back
	c. Work indoor
	d. Keep 1/4th stomach empty
	e. Complete silence
	f. Follow the Sheela
	g. Don't mix multiple techniques
12. Five perspects/sheela of Buddhism:
	a. not to kill
	b. not to steal
	c. not to have any sexual misconduct
	d. not to involve in harmful speech/lie/harsh words
	e. not to consume intoxicants

Day 2:
1. Untrained mind is very dangerous (creates havoc). Trained mind (patiently and persistently) can serve the human society.
2. We ourselves have to walk on the path to reach the final goal. You will get support on this Dhamma path.
3. Tathagath/Buddha = liberated person, person who reached the final goal. This person will show the path but the individual (non Tathagath) himself has to walk over it.
4. Dhamma = universal law of nature, the truth
	a. Abstain from sinful actions
	b. Perform wholesome pious actions
	c. Purify your mind (wisdom)
5. Sinful/Unwholesome action: Any action, physical or vocal, that harms/hurts other beings and disturbs the peace/harmony of other beings
6. Pious/Wholesome action: Any action, physical or vocal, that supports/helps other beings creating peaceful/harmonious atmosphere where the being is not harmed/hurted
7. Sheela (4a and 4b) = morality, Samadhi = Mastery over the mind (concentrate on your breathing from moment to moment), Pragya/Panna (4c) = Vipassana meditation helps to achieve this = liberation
8. Yathabhuta = the reality of this moment as it is, not as you would like it to be
9. The outgoing breath is warmer than incoming breath
10. Any sensation can crop up. Just observe that sensation that has manifested automatically while breathing and do not react to it. Just accept the reality of the current moment as it is without reacting to it. If unable to feel any sensation, then just focus on your respiration till the point the sensation crops up.
11. Just see the sensation in the nose area only. Don't focus on sensations in the other parts of the body.
12. If multiple sensations occur in the nose area, then focus on the most subtle sensation. This makes your mind sharp.

Day 3:
1. Anapana = observation of natural, normal respiration, as it comes in and as it goes out.
2. Anichya = There is change at every moment (child/person grows/decays every moment). There is no drastic sudden change observed. We should experience this change at every moment.
3. We may feel that our body is solidified reality but in fact it is vibrations/wavelets (10^22 Hz). Hence, do not get too much attached to your body and mind. Else you will get raga or dvesha.

Day 4:
1. Vedna = experience/feeling the reality/sensation
2. Move your focus from each part of the body during Vipassana meditation. Please focus on subtler sensations compared to gross sensations during meditation to make your mind sharp. The order: top of head, entire head, entire face, right and left arm, throat, chest, stomach, neck, upper back, lower back, hip, buttocks, right and left legs.
3. You must reach a stage where you feel sensations in every part of the body. At this point, the mind will be very sensitive/sharp.
4. Sensation = whatever you experience at the physical level. Examples: heat, perspiration, pulsation, heaviness, numbness, itching, pressure, pain, throbbing, etc.
5. If you don't feel any sensation on a body part, please stay focussed on that body part for 2 minutes. There is so subtle sensation in this body part that your mind is unable to note it. Rest assured that the sensation is present on every body part. But the mind is busy noting all the gross sensations that the subtle sensation gets ignored. Please don't crave for sensation. Be equanimous.
6. If you seed bitterness, bitterness will grow. If you seed sweetness, sweetness will grow. As your action is, so your result will be. So be careful about your actions.
7. Three types of actions: physical, vocal and mental. Mental action should be given priority as everything starts in the mind first. Physical and Vocal actions are projection of the mental action. If mentally happy, then the vocal and physical action will that be of happy condition. Same applies to sad/ill-will.
8. Four segments of mind:
	a. Conscious: The 6 senses of human (touch, sound, smell, taste, vision, mind)
	b. Perception: Recognize that one of the senses has received some signal. And find whether the signal received is pleasant or unpleasant.
	d. Vedna: Based on pleasant or unpleasant signal received, there is a flow of either subtle/pleasant or unpleasant vibrations throughout the body.
	e. Sankhara: Reaction of the mind based on the received input signal. This is responsible for performing the action.
	Train your mind so that it is not affected by pleasant and unpleasant sensations. And not to react to these pleasant and unpleasant sensation.

Day 5:
1. If you learn to observe misery as misery without reacting to it, you will be liberated. Be equanimous.
2. Three noble truths: 1) Observe the pain/misery objectively 2) Observe the real deepest cause of the misery (misery starts inside which maybe caused by external factors) 3) Eradicate the cause of the misery which leads to no more misery
3. Cause of misery: 1) Craving: Somethings that we wish to happen doesn't happen. Please don't get attached to something or some memory. 2) Aversion: Getting rid of something unpleasant doesn't happen.
4. We have attachment with I/mine (my watch, my TV, etc.) such that when its craving is not satisfied or gets broken, we go into misery state. Hence, avoid any attachment.
5. Ignorance create Sankhara -> Sankhara creates conscious -> Conscious creates a new mind and physical structure -> mind + physical structure creates 6 senses -> 6 senses create contact with outside world -> contact creates sensation -> sensation creates craving -> craving creates deep attachment -> attachment creates misery.
   So, if the experienced sensation is not reacted to, then there will be no misery and the above chain is broken. This will start the process of liberation by restricting the Sankhara.
6. Once we stop generating new Sankharas, the old ones will start coming up (accumulation of the past) in the form of some sensation, don't react to these old Sankharas so that they lose their strength and get eradicated. Be equanimous. This is Anichya.

Day 6:
1. Optimism + Realism + Workism is taught by Dhamma
2. We crave for pleasant sensation. We are addicted to this. Please don't do this. Don't lose the balance of mind. Be satisfied with whatever you have.
3. Householder should donate for the benefit of others without any expectations from other.

Day 7:
1. Awareness of the sensation across the body while doing other chores (walking, eating, bathing, resting, etc.) is what is required at the end.
2. Develop truth, love, compassion, purity, enlightenment, good-will for others. Don't blindly devote Buddha, better is to follow his teachings of Dhamma. Kill all your mental impurities.
3. Qualities of Dhamma:
	a. Should be very clearly explained to an ordinary person
	b. the truth should be experienced directly and should not trust the truth of some other person
	c. getting the fruits of Dhamma should not take time, benefits should be seen in this current life.
	d. You will automatically think about sharing these benefits with others. You may either donate some money so that others can get these teachings or serve for a 10-day course.
4. Five friends of Dhamma: Keep them close
	a. Devotion/Faith on the teachings and the path of Dhamma
	b. Efforts in the proper direction
	c. Awareness of the present moment and the sensations
	d. Samadhi: Free from craving and aversion. Continue to be aware of the reality from moment to moment.
	e. Panna: Be equanimous

Day 8:
1. You should start getting a free flow of very subtle vibrations throughout the body. This is a pleasant flow which can lead to craving. Don't crave for this.
2. Don't generate new Sankharas, let the old Sankharas get eradicated. Generating new Sankharas will multiply your misery.
3. We have to take strong action wherever necessary. Example: An agressor is harming a weak person, if you feel that you don't care since you are vipassana meditator, then this is against Dhamma. Please take very strong action but in a calm way.
   A non-vipassana meditator will have strong craving for the weak person and strong aversion for the agressor. A vipassana meditator will take action but in a calm way (he will have compassion for the weak but more compassion for the agressor (agressor will be seen as ignorant person who doesn't know what he is doing)).
4. Be in the present and don't plant any seed of misery/darkness. Plant seed of brightness/hapiness.

Day 9:
1. Practice Vipassana every morning and evening 1 hour each.
2. When you get unpleasant or pleasant sensation, you get so overpowered by this sensation that you forget about your reaction to this sensation. Please be aware of your sensation and do not react to it all the times.
3. Please don't find the misery outside, find it inside your mind-body framework using the Vipassana meditation. Vipassana helps to make your Sankhara weaker and observing objectively skill stronger.
4. Pure love is what you just give and don't expect the same in return. This helps a meditator to come out of his selfishness.
5. Qualities to fulfill by the end of this course:
	a. Renunciation: Live a life of a monk/nun for 10-days. Live on charity of others (food, facility, etc.). So nothing provided in the Dhamma location is yours, all of it is a charity of others. This helps to dissolve our ego (egolessness). Beggers have no choice. No charges for teaching, boarding, lodging, etc.
	b. Five precepts of Buddhism
	c. Efforts to be put to purify the mind
	d. Panna: Experience the reality and live in line with the universal nature law
	e. Tolerance for others: Generate compassion and love for others
	f. Trust the truth that you experience
	g. Strong Determination (Adithan): Stay for 10-days, don't change your meditation posture, follow all the rules
	h. Love/compassion for others
	i. Be equanimous for raga and dvesha
	j. Donation without expectation

Day 10:
1. Anyone who is walking on the path of Dhamma should see the following progress bar:
	a. Feeling to serve others without any expectation in return. If this quality is not developing, then the meditator is still self-centered and the mind purification is still not started.
	b. Develop a feeling of gratitude should arise.

Day 11:
1. Dhamma always make you self-dependent. These 10-days, you have learnt how to practice Dhamma in reality.
2. Your work capacity increases after practising Vipassana for 1 hour morning and evening daily. Keep growing in Dhamma.